# Clustering
Clustering is done recursively at genetic distances 20, 10, and 5. These are sometimes informally called "20 SNPs" etc but strictly speaking they can result from indels or coverage differences. For the time being, these values are hardcoded, but the way clustering works means you can easily filter/ignore values at distances not valid for your analysis -- for example, some users of the TB Cluster Tracker ignore clusters at 20 as that's a bit excessive for tuberculosis.

Clustering is specifically defined by "every sample in a cluster is with X distance of at least one other sample in a cluster." This means that any two samples might be >X apart, as long as there exists another sample "chaining" them together. For example, when clustering at 20, if A:B = 15, B:C = 6, and A:C = 21, all three will form a cluster at 20 due to B "chaining" A and C together. Additionally, B and C will form a subcluster at 10, but that subcluster will not contain A.

A sample can only be in one cluster *at a given distance* at a time. In the persistent case (see below), if a new sample would bridge the gap between two existing clusters, those two clusters will merge into one.

## Persistent Clusters
Tree Nine is used by CDPH to track TB clusters over time by taking in inputs from previous Tree Nine runs. The script will maintain persistent cluster IDs over time, allowing for long-term tracking of clusters. It will also generate a report showing how clusters have changed.

> [!NOTE]  
> If you have access to the TB Cluster Tracker website, you don't need the change report generated by Tree Nine, as a more advanced version that can be limited to track only clusters you have manually selected and/or are in counties you care about is available. This "cluster subscription" functionality cannot be extended to Tree Nine due to WDL limitations, so Tree Nine has its own change report which reports *all* changes at *all* clusters.

The recommended way of doing this is, is to have every run of Tree Nine take in:
* The exact same base tree every time (that is to say: do not use the tree output by previous Tree Nine runs)
* Last run's combined diff file
* Last run's sample names file
* Last run's persistentIDSYYYY-MM-DD.tsv file
* Last run's persistentMETAYYYY-MM-DD.tsv file
* Last run's all_cluster_informationYYYY-MM-DD.json file
* Your latest "batch" of diff files will be input as `diffs` with WDL type `Array[File]`

You shouldn't ever need to manually edit or review these files unless you want to give clusters custom names (see below).

### all_clusters_informationYYYY-MM-DD.json
Strictly speaking this file is not necessary, but it is currently required by the input validation checker as some prints to ease in tracking clusters over time rely on it. It may return to being optional again in the future.

### persistentIDSYYYY-MM-DD.tsv
Tracks cluster membership per sample. "Indexed" by sample, although samples that cluster at multiple files will **intentionally** appear in this file multiple times. As of 0.6.9 this file is also used to track the date a sample was added to a given cluster at a given distance. Any cluster referenced in persistentIDS should also be in persistentMETA, and vice versa.

### persistentMETAYYYY-MM-DD.tsv
Tracks metadata for clusters, including Microreact URI if assigned. Any cluster referenced in persistentIDS should also be in persistentMETA, and vice versa.

## Custom cluster names (persistent case only)
Although find_clusters.py assigns clusters a zfilled six-digit UUID, nothing is stopping you from providing persistentIDS and persistentMETA files with arbitrary strings as cluster names -- in fact, this is what our test set does to demonstrate what's being tested. Just make sure to replace the UUID in all locations in both persistent files (and preferably all_cluster_information too).

> [!WARNING]  
> Persistent cluster IDs cannot be substrings of other persistent IDs. For example, if a persistent ID is called "ALPHA_BETA" and another persistent ID is called "ALPHA", that will cause problems. However, "ALPHA_BETA" and "AAAAA" would be fine, even though both share the letter A. Cluster names assigned by find_clusters.py cannot generate substrings as they are [zfilled](https://www.w3schools.com/Python/ref_string_zfill.asp), so if you're not renaming clusters outside of Tree Nine, you don't need to worry about this.

## Backmasking
UShER's assignment of branch length when it comes to ambigious (low-coverage) positions can vary slightly (typically only +/- 1) across runs. Other phylogenetics programs such as the (now-defunct) BioNumerics software instead do not count any ambigious positions within closely related samples. Tree Nine attempts to take the best of both worlds by identifying clusters via UShER's assignments, and within those clusters, calculates a distance matrix and subtree using both UShER's determinations and the mask-everything-ambigious rules, the latter of which we call "backmasking" (as you're literally going back and masking those positions).

## Performance Bottlenecks
The two largest bottlenecks in clustering are:
* The creation of the initial distance matrix between all sample considered for clustering
  * [PhyloDM](https://github.com/aaronmussig/PhyloDM) is being considered as a replacement
* Generating cluster subtrees; due to how matUtils works, this requires opening and closing the base tree once per subtree
  * The base tree used for CDPH's tuberculosis clustering takes approximately 2 seconds to open, which is hella quick all things considered, but adds up quickly when you're generating 8000 subtrees
 
Any future attempts to make clustering more efficient should focus on those two problems.

## General process (persistent case)
1. find_clusters.py finds clusters of every sample, without regard to their persistent cluster IDs, instead assigning them "latest" cluster IDs randomly
2. process_clusters.py, which takes in find_clusters.py's "latest" clusters and the persistent information files:
 i. calls Marc's perl's script
 ii. processes Marc's perl script outputs to translate "latest" IDs into peristent IDs, while accounting for edge cases specific to tuberculosis (such as the same cluster ID being assigned to two different distances)
 iii. assigns/updates date-sample-added-to-cluster as needed
 iv. assigns and double-checks parent/subcluster relationships
 v. uploads to Microreact
 vi. generates two change reports (one with everything, one that excludes clusters at 20)
